
===== PAGE 1/20 =====
Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
(V olume 1: Long Papers), pages 9574–9593
April 29 - May 4, 2025 ©2025 Association for Computational Linguistics
Behavior-SD: Behaviorally Aware Spoken Dialogue Generation
with Large Language Models
Sehun Lee* Kang-wook Kim* Gunhee Kim
Seoul National University
shlee@vision.snu.ac.kr full324@snu.ac.kr gunhee@snu.ac.kr
https://yhytoto12.github.io/Behavior-SD
Abstract
Spoken dialogue involves behaviors like
turn-taking, interruptions, filler words, and
backchannels, which make interactions more
natural and engaging but are often overlooked
in language models. These models struggle
to explicitly model these behavioral traits, re-
sulting in a less natural and personalized com-
munication style that aligns with user needs.
To address this challenge, we make two key
contributions. First, we introduce Behavior-
SD, a large-scale dataset containing over 100K
spoken dialogues (2,164 hours) annotated with
various conversational behaviors, synthesized
via LLMs to model diverse full-duplex interac-
tions. Second, we propose BeDLM, the first di-
alogue model capable of generating natural con-
versations conditioned on specific behavioral
and narrative contexts, supporting simultaneous
contributions from both speakers. Through hu-
man evaluations and behavior-adherence met-
rics, we demonstrate that BeDLM outperforms
baseline models in generating natural, coher-
ent, and behaviorally rich dialogues. Our
work opens new possibilities for developing
behaviorally-aware dialogue systems that more
closely mimic human conversational dynamics,
enhancing user engagement and communica-
tion effectiveness.
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have significantly
improved their ability to generate coherent text;
however, producing human-like spoken dialogues
remains a considerable challenge. Spoken conver-
sations are inherently dynamic, involving elements
like prosody, emotion (Osman, 2022), turn-taking,
and interruptions (Nguyen et al., 2023). Captur-
ing these nuances is crucial for generating life-
like dialogue, yet current TTS systems (Guo et al.,
2023; Du et al., 2024) and spoken language mod-
*Equal contribution.
els (Zhang et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024) struggle to
replicate this complexity fully.
A particularly challenging aspect of real-world
conversations is managing full-duplex communi-
cation, where speakers frequently overlap or inter-
rupt each other. Full-duplex conversations, unlike
traditional systems that enforce strict turn-taking,
enable more fluid interactions, which can be ben-
eficial in applications such as customer service,
education, or voice assistant applications (Si et al.,
2023; Google, 2024; OpenAI, 2024). Addition-
ally, conversational dynamics are influenced by
personal traits, social contexts, and factors like po-
liteness (Bevacqua et al., 2012; Yamamoto et al.,
2018), making this task even more complex.
Despite the prevalence of these dynamics in hu-
man conversations, they are often underexplored
in dialogue generation. While existing spoken di-
alogue datasets (Cieri et al., 2004; Godfrey et al.,
1992; Reece et al., 2023) include conversational
behaviors such as interruptions and backchannels,
these behaviors are not labeled at the speaker level,
limiting the ability to model nuanced interaction
patterns. Recent datasets (Lee et al., 2023; Lin
et al., 2024) focus on sequential turn-taking, over-
looking critical aspects of natural conversations
like overlapping speech and interruptions.
To address these gaps, we present Behavior-SD,
a large-scale dataset of over 100K spoken dialogues
(SD), totaling 2,164 hours, and covering a wide
range of conversational behaviors and social sit-
uations. Unlike existing datasets constrained by
narrow contexts (Cieri et al., 2004; Godfrey et al.,
1992; Reece et al., 2023), Behavior-SD explicitly
models key conversational traits such as verbosity,
backchannels, and interruptions, allowing for more
realistic modeling of human-like dialogues. This
dataset serves as a foundation for improving both
the scale and behavioral diversity of dialogue gen-
eration. Specifically, it captures four key speaker
behavior traits, as outlined in Table 1.
9574
===== PAGE 2/20 =====
Behavior types Definition
(V) Verbosity The length of utterances during a speaker’s turn.
(F) Filler words The occurrence of filler words ( e.g, "like," "um", "you know") during a speaker’s turn.
(B) Backchannels The frequency of backchannel responses ( e.g, "yeah," "uh-huh") during the other speaker’s turn.
(I) Interruptions The frequency of interrupting the other speaker’s turn to begin speaking.
Table 1: Definition of behavior types for full-duplex interactions in conversational dialogues. Each behavior type is
classified into three levels: none (0), moderate (1), and frequent (2).
Moreover, we introduce Behavior-conditioned
spoken Dialogue Language Model (BeDLM), the
first model capable of generating full-duplex spo-
ken dialogues by incorporating behavior traits.
By integrating these traits through control tokens,
BeDLM produces more dynamic and lifelike con-
versations, adapting naturally to speaker personal-
ities and narrative context. This novel approach
enables customization of dialogue behaviors in a
way that previous models, which typically focus on
static turn-taking, cannot achieve.
In our experiments, BeDLM demonstrates im-
provements in dialogue naturalness and adherence
to conditions compared to state-of-the-art models.
The dataset, model, and code will be made publicly
available to encourage further research in this area.
2 Related Works
Automatic spoken dialogue generation. The au-
tomatic synthesis of dialogues using LLMs has
made significant strides, but generating spoken di-
alogue remains challenging due to features like
paralinguistic cues, interruptions, and unclear turn
boundaries in speech (Abdullin et al., 2023; Kim
et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2024). Approaches such as
dGSLM (Nguyen et al., 2023) have tackled overlap-
ping speech generation using dual-tower transform-
ers without text inputs, while CHATS (Mitsui et al.,
2023) builds on this by generating natural spoken
dialogues from text transcriptions. However, these
methods lack mechanisms to condition overall con-
versational behavior throughout a dialogue.
Conditional speech generation. Recent mod-
els like PromptTTS (Guo et al., 2023), Au-
diobox (Vyas et al., 2023), and CosyV oice (Du
et al., 2024) have advanced text-to-speech (TTS)
by incorporating natural language instructions to
vary prosodic features like accent, emotion, pitch,
and speed. However, these models focus on iso-
lated utterances and lack the ability to maintain
consistency across full conversations, including
conversational behaviors such as turn-taking and
backchanneling. As a result, they struggle to repli-
cate natural dialogue flow.
Spoken dialogue behaviors. Research has
shown that conversational behaviors like backchan-
nels and interruptions play a crucial role in commu-
nication, signaling listener engagement and influ-
encing dialogue flow (Reece et al., 2023; Bavelas
et al., 2000). These behaviors vary based on con-
text and individual traits (Blomsma et al., 2024).
Traditional dialogue systems have attempted to ac-
count for such nuances by manually inserting fillers
or backchannels, but they lack the flexibility to
adapt dynamically to the conversation (De Sevin
et al., 2010). Recent efforts focus on equipping
LLMs to handle interruptions more naturally, en-
hancing interaction fluidity (Ma et al., 2024; Zhang
et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024), highlighting the
importance of integrating these behaviors for more
natural dialogue.
Spoken language models. Spoken language
models (SLMs) have evolved from textless ap-
proaches like GSLM (Lakhotia et al., 2021), which
convert speech into discrete units and training sim-
ilarly to text-based language models. Recent ad-
vancements enhance SLMs by directly integrating
speech representations into pre-trained LLMs. For
instance, SpeechGPT (Zhang et al., 2023) incorpo-
rates speech tokens into LLMs through instruction
tuning, enabling more natural and context-aware
audio interactions. AudioGPT (Huang et al., 2024),
LLaMA-Omni (Fang et al., 2024), and Qwen-
Audio (Chu et al., 2023) integrate multimodal in-
puts, including text and various audio types, to
support multimodal interactions without relying on
speech transcription.
3 Behavior-driven Data Generation
Our framework for dataset generation operates in
four stages: (1) generating dialogues with behavior-
specific traits, (2) inserting backchannels at con-
textually appropriate moments, (3) captioning the
speech style of each utterance for TTS integration,
9575
===== PAGE 3/20 =====
Timing-driven utterance placement
SODASpeakers
Hugo, Keaton
Narrative
Hugo teaches Keaton amagic trick involving a ball
and a hat. Hugo is excited
to see the look on Keaton's
face when he performs the
trick.
Speaker's behaviors
Hugo: Verbosity (1),
Fillers (2), Interruptions (0),
Backchannels (0)
Keaton: Verbosity (0),Fillers (0), Interruptions (2),
Backchannels (1)
Dialogue
Generation
Backchannel
Insertion
Hugo: Just keep an eye on this ball. Now-
Keaton (Interrupt): Hold on, where did you
get the ball?
Hugo: Oh, it's just a normal one, nothing
special. Now, watch closely.
Hugo: Oh, it's just a normal one, {
Keaton (backchannel): [MASK] mhm... 
Hugo: } nothing special. {} Now, watch closely.
Speech Style
Captioning
Hugo: Oh, it's just a normal one, : 
(normal pitch / fast speed / happy emotion) : 
(a) Rich Text Dialogue (RTD) Generation via LLMs (b) RTD to Spoken Dialogue
{} : BOPs
Rich Text
Dialogue
Conditional TTS
(CosyVoice)
Speaker
bank
BI I
Two-channel spoken dialogue
I
B
I
Figure 1: Overall data generation pipeline. (a) Narrative and conversational behaviors are sampled. The conversation
is then simulated using LLMs, incorporating backchannel opportunity points (BOPs) detection, backchannel
insertion, and speech style captioning to model diverse full-duplex interactions (§3.1). (b) The generated text
dialogues are converted into spoken form by CosyV oice and timing-driven utterance placement (§3.2).
and (4) converting text dialogues into spoken form.
Figure 1 overviews the framework. All detailed
prompts for LLMs can be found in Appendix A.
3.1 Rich Text Dialogue Generation via LLMs
Sample narrative and conversational behaviors.
To generate diverse social spoken dialogues, we
sample two key elements: narratives and conver-
sational behaviors. We sample narratives from the
SODA dataset (Kim et al., 2023), since it covers
a broad spectrum of social interactions. Conver-
sational behaviors include four traits, each catego-
rized into three levels (0, 1, 2), as shown in Ta-
ble 1. For each conversation, two speakers are
sampled with separate behavioral traits to ensure a
variety of interaction styles. We further categorize
interruptions into seven types: agreement, disagree-
ment, floor taking, tangentialization, clarification,
assistance, and topic change, as follows Goldberg
(1990). Based on the sampled traits of speakers,
specific categories of interruptions are applied, en-
suring realistic conversational dynamics.
Dialogue generation via LLMs. With narrative
and speaker-specific conversational behaviors, we
guide GPT-4o to generate complete multi-turn
spoken conversations of 8-12 turns. To enhance
the naturalness of the dialogue, we enable the
LLM to depict laughter, using notations such
as [laughter] or <laughter>yeah<laughter/>
(indicating a laugh while saying "yeah") to repre-
sent it. If an interruption occurs during the conver-
sation, the corresponding utterance is marked as
Interrupt for the speech synthesizing process.
Backchannel insertion. Backchannels typically
occur at natural pause points in dialogue, often re-
ferred to as backchannel opportunity points (BOPs).
Previous approaches (Kawahara, 2019) manually
insert backchannels from a predefined set of re-
sponses (e.g, "hmm," "yeah") with no consider-
ation of conversational context. In contrast, we
use LLMs to automatically detect BOPs and gener-
ate diverse contextually appropriate backchannels
based on predefined conversational behaviors, as
illustrated in Figure 1.
Specifically, we first instruct LLMs to segment
utterances at natural pause points to identify BOPs.
Next, we select a subset of these BOPs based
on the speaker’s backchannel behavior level. At
these BOPs, we insert "speaker (backchannel):
[MASK]", allowing LLMs to generate contextually
appropriate backchannel responses by filling in the
[MASK]. We use GPT-4o-mini for BOP detection
and GPT-4o for generating backchannel responses.
Speech style captioning for TTS. We use GPT-
4o-mini to generate speaking styles, including
pitch, speaking rate, and emotion for each sentence.
The generated styles are then input into the condi-
tional TTS model, as described in §3.2.
3.2 Spoken Dialogue Generation from Text
Conditional TTS model. To convert rich text di-
alogues into spoken form, we utilize a CosyV oice-
Instruct (Du et al., 2024), conditional text-to-
speech (TTS) model that incorporates style at-
9576
===== PAGE 4/20 =====
Dataset Full-
Duplex
Behavior
Label
Public
Accessibility Category # Dialogues Audio (hrs) Naturalness ( ↑) Emotion ( ↑) Sound Quality ( ↑)
Fisher ✓ recorded 5,850 984 - - -
Switchboard ✓ recorded 2,400 260 - - -
CANDOR ✓ ✓ recorded 1,650 850 3.73 ± 0.08 3.58 ± 0.07 3.54 ± 0.07
MELD ✓ ✓ recorded 1,400 12 3.79 ± 0.07 3.68 ± 0.07 3.61 ± 0.08
DailyTalk ✓ recorded 2,541 20 3.89 ± 0.07 3.77 ± 0.07 3.82 ± 0.07
StyleTalk ✓ TTS-converted 2,364 7 3.88 ± 0.07 3.77 ± 0.07 3.78 ± 0.07
Behavior-SD ✓ ✓ ✓ TTS-converted 108,174 2,164 3.94 ± 0.07 3.78 ± 0.07 3.87 ± 0.06
Table 2: Statistics and human evaluation results of various spoken dialogue datasets. Citations are provided in the
main text due to space constraints (§4).
Statistics
# dialogues 108,174
# utterances 1,091,323
total duration (hr) 2,164
avg. duration (sec) 72.0 ± 27.1
avg. duration per uttr. (sec) 7.15 ± 2.66
avg. words per uttr. 18.56 ± 10.85
# speakers (male / female) 26 / 26
(a) Dataset statistics
(b) Distribution of measures across different behavior levels.
Figure 2: Overall statistics and distribution analysis of the dataset.
tributes specific to each sentence. We randomly
sample 26 female and 26 male speakers. These
speakers are then stored in a speaker bank, from
which we randomly sample to construct the dataset.
Further details about the speaker bank are provided
in Appendix B.1. The final output is rendered
as two-channel audio, where each channel corre-
sponds to a single speaker in the dialogue.
Consistent utterance continuation. Each utter-
ance is synthesized independently, so maintaining
speaker consistency and smooth transitions is crit-
ical. To achieve this, we provide the previous
utterance of the current speaker as additional in-
put to the TTS model. CosyV oice-Base supports
speech prompting, where generation starts from
a provided speech token. To ensure continuity,
we augment the input with the current utterance’s
text τi, style instruction ei, the speaker’s initial
text and speech (τ0,s 0), and the previous utter-
ance’s text and speech (τi−1,s i−1), forming the
sequence: [ei,τ 0,τ i−1,τ i,s 0,s i−1, <EOP>]. This
structure enables temporal coherence and speaker
consistency. Importantly, the input does not in-
clude the previous utterance of the other speaker.
CosyV oice-Instruct, however, uses only style in-
structions without prompting. Our approach com-
bines both, improving consistency and coherence
across utterances.
Timing-driven utterance placement. The pre-
viously generated utterances are categorized as
Backchannel, Interrupt, or None. When merg-
ing them, their timing is adjusted to mimic the
natural flow of conversation. These placements are
based on Gaussian distributions derived from statis-
tics in a real-world spoken dialogue corpus (Reece
et al., 2023). Specifically, none-type utterances
are appended with an inter-utterance gap sampled
fromN (0.4s, 0.2s), backchannels follow after a
brief delay sampled fromN (0.2s, 0.02s), and in-
terrupts overlap the preceding speech by a duration
drawn fromN (0.45s, 0.05s).
4 The Behavior-SD Dataset
Using the pipeline in the previous section, we con-
tribute Behavior-SD (Behavior-driven Spoken Dia-
logues) as a large-scale, full-duplex dataset that cap-
tures a diverse range of social interactions and con-
versational behaviors. A sample from our dataset
is shown in Figure 3.
Table 2 presents the statistics and human evalu-
ation results of various spoken dialogue datasets.
We compare our Behavior-SD with several exist-
ing datasets: human-recorded conversations from
CANDOR (Reece et al., 2023), Switchboard (God-
frey et al., 1992), Fisher (Cieri et al., 2004), and
MELD (Poria et al., 2019), human-read text con-
versations from DailyTalk (Lee et al., 2023), and
text dialogues converted to speech using TTS from
9577
===== PAGE 5/20 =====
Narrative
Abigail is observant. He recognizes Caelyn’s scent of laven-
der and vanilla. He knows she uses the same shampoo and
body wash.
Behaviors
Abigail: V(0) F(1) B(1) I(0)
Caelyn: V(0) F(0) B(0) I(2)
→ Interruption scenarios: Topic change, Assistance
Dialogue
Abigail: Is that lavender and vanilla?
Caelyn: Yes, my shampoo and body wash scent.
Abigail: It’s... um, nice. Very relaxing.
Caelyn: Thank you. {Yeah} [laughter] {[laughter]} I chose
it for that reason.
Abigail: I thought so. It fits the calming vibe... You know.
Caelyn (interrupt): Speaking of calming, did you try the
meditation app?
Abigail: No, not yet. But you think it’s—
Caelyn (interrupt): Helpful for stress, {oh, really?} defi-
nitely.
Abigail: I’ve been meaning to, but it slipped my mind.
Caelyn: Well, make sure to give it a try.
Abigail: Yeah, sure. Sounds good.
Figure 3: A rich text dialogue sample of Behavior-SD.
StyleTalk (Lin et al., 2024). We run human evalua-
tion on Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk), and ask
participants to rate each 30-second audio samples
on three aspects: dialogue naturalness, emotion
appropriateness, and sound quality, using a 1-5
scale. Dialogue naturalness measures whether the
conversation flow feels like a real-life interaction.
Emotion appropriateness assesses whether the emo-
tions in the dialogue align with the context. Sound
quality evaluates how clear the audio is and the
extent to which it is free of noise.
As shown in Table 2, Behavior-SD is the only
publicly available dataset that includes speaker be-
havior labels, setting it apart from other datasets.
Moreover, Behavior-SD contains over 100K dia-
logues and 2K hours of audio, far surpassing the
sizes of the other datasets. The human evaluation
demonstrates that Behavior-SD is preferred to other
datasets in all three aspects. These findings indi-
cate that Behavior-SD, with its larger scale and
the inclusion of behavior labels, offers a distinct
advantage over existing datasets. Moreover, the
higher human evaluation scores of Behavior-SD in
naturalness, emotion appropriateness, and sound
quality further demonstrate its suitability for the
research of behavior-rich spoken dialogues.
Figure 2 presents the detailed statistics of our
dataset, showing the distribution of key conversa-
tional features across different behavior levels. It
illustrates how varying behavior categories impact
the length and structure of conversations. For ex-
ample, the duration of utterances differs notably
between behavior levels, indicating different con-
versational patterns. Additionally, features such as
filler words, backchannels, and interruptions show
distinct distribution trends across behavior levels.
5 BeDLM: Behavior-conditioned
Dialogue Language Models
This section introduces BeDLM, a spoken dialogue
language model designed to generate simultaneous
two-channel speech conditioned on conversational
behaviors and a narrative. Our BeDLM addresses
several key challenges: (1) enabling LLMs to com-
prehend spoken dialogue forms beyond mere tex-
tual representations and (2) equipping LLMs to
interpret conversational behaviors and effectively
incorporate them into dialogue generation.
To leverage the rich capabilities of LLMs, we
utilize a pre-trained LLM instead of training a
transformer-based language model from scratch.
This allows us to benefit that LLMs already has
extensive knowledge of language patterns and dia-
logue structures, thereby allowing BeDLM to gen-
erate more nuanced and contextually appropriate
outputs. In our work, we use Llama3.2-1B (Dubey
et al., 2024; Meta, 2024) as a base model.
5.1 Speech Representations
Following previous approaches on SLMs (Zhang
et al., 2023; Hassid et al., 2024; Nguyen et al.,
2023), we utilize HuBERT (Hsu et al., 2021) to dis-
cretize speech signals into 500 unique units, which
serve as a compact representation of speech. These
units are incorporated into the LLM as additional
tokens in its vocabulary, labeled ⟨S0⟩,⟨S1⟩, . . . ,
⟨S499⟩. To reconstruct audio from these discrete
speech representations, we employ a two-stage ap-
proach: (1) HuBERT2Mel, which converts Hu-
BERT representations into mel spectrograms, and
(2) HiFi-GAN (Kong et al., 2020a), which syn-
thesizes raw waveforms from the generated mel
spectrograms.
5.2 Streamlined Spoken Dialogue
Representations
To model full-duplex spoken dialogue, handling
gaps and overlapping speech ( e.g, interruptions,
backchannels) is crucial. Although dGSLM em-
ploys a dual-tower model to predict two channels
9578
===== PAGE 6/20 =====
Narrative & Behaviors
Conditions
Prompt Streamlined units
A
B
2-channel units
BeDLM
Additional
Control Tokens
HuBERT
Tokens
Vocoder
HiFi-GAN
Stereo audio
Figure 4: Overview of the proposed conditional spoken-dialogue generation pipeline. Narrative and behavior
conditions serve as prompts for BeDLM to generate streamlined units, which are then converted into a two-channel
unit sequence using additional control tokens (e.g,⟨A⟩,⟨B⟩,⟨GAP⟩). Each channel’s unit sequence is individually
synthesized into audio by HiFi-GAN, and the resulting audio signals are combined to form stereo audio.
simultaneously, this approach inherently restricts
the model’s ability to fully leverage the power of
LLMs. Furthermore, alternating predictions be-
tween channels (e.g, [A][B]|[A][B]|[A][B]) is inef-
ficient, as it doubles the number of tokens required
to represent the same duration of speech.
We introduce a novel duplex dialogue represen-
tation that uses control tokens to mark overlap-
ping speech and backchannels. The tokens ⟨A⟩
and⟨B⟩ indicate the beginning of each speaker’s
turn.⟨GAP⟩ and⟨OVERLAP⟩ represent silences
and overlaps, with each token covering 40ms. For
instance, the sequence ⟨GAP⟩⟨GAP⟩⟨GAP⟩⟨A⟩
denotes a 120ms silence before Speaker A be-
gins, whereas⟨OVERLAP⟩⟨OVERLAP⟩⟨B⟩ indi-
cates an 80ms period of overlapping speech during
Speaker B’s turn. Backchannels are delineated by
enclosing them between the⟨BC_S⟩ and⟨BC_E⟩
tokens, enabling precise control over conversa-
tional dynamics. More details are in Figure 6.
This method efficiently models two-channel dia-
logue into single-channel stream while preserving
LLM performance, converting the tokenized se-
quences into two-channel audio via a vocoder for
natural speech generation.
5.3 Conditional Spoken Dialogue Generation
To enable LLMs to generate spoken dialogues that
align with a given narrative and various conversa-
tional behaviors, we train them using our Behavior-
SD dataset. However, generating spoken dialogues
directly from a narrative is challenging, so we first
conduct pre-training by generating text-based dia-
logues from the conditions. This process is done
through supervised fine-tuning using the prompt
specified in Figure 7.
Next, as illustrated in Figure 4, we fine-tune the
LLM to directly generate streamlined spoken dia-
logue representations when provided with a prompt
that includes the narrative and behavior conditions.
6 Experiments
In this section, we provide the details of model
training and baselines for spoken dialogue genera-
tion.
6.1 Model Training
Finetuning HuBERT and HiFi-GAN. To en-
hance the expressiveness of BeDLM, we fine-tune
the HuBERT (Hsu et al., 2021), HuBERT2Mel,
and HiFi-GAN (Kong et al., 2020a) models using
the Behavior-SD corpus. Specifically, the k-means
quantizer of the HuBERT model is adapted to cap-
ture key acoustic features. The HuBERT2Mel mod-
ule is then trained to convert the HuBERT represen-
tations into mel spectrograms. Finally, HiFi-GAN
is fine-tuned to synthesize raw waveforms from the
generated mel spectrograms. Training details for
each module are presented in Appendix C.
BeDLM training. We first create a supervised-
finetuning dataset from our Behavior-SD dataset
9579
===== PAGE 7/20 =====
LM settings Mean Opinion Scores ( ↑)
Models SLM (or LM) Output Sequence Naturalness Meaningfulness Sound Quality
Ground-Truth - - 4.14 ± 0.08 4.02 ± 0.08 4.12 ± 0.08
Resynthesized - - 4.09 ± 0.08 4.02 ± 0.08 4.04 ± 0.08
Cascaded GPT-4o Text dialogue 4.12 ± 0.08 3.97 ± 0.08 4.09 ± 0.08
Cascaded Llama3-70B Text dialogue 4.08 ± 0.09 3.97 ± 0.09 4.10 ± 0.09
dGSLM DLM 2-channel units 3.96 ± 0.09 3.88 ± 0.09 3.92 ± 0.09
BeDLM Llama3.2-1B Alternating units 3.90 ± 0.09 3.86 ± 0.09 3.85 ± 0.10
BeDLM (w/o pretrain) Llama3.2-1B Streamlined units 4.00 ± 0.08 3.89 ± 0.08 3.99 ± 0.09
BeDLM (ours) Llama3.2-1B Streamlined units 4.09 ± 0.09 4.04 ± 0.08 4.05 ± 0.09
Table 3: Comparison of Naturalness, Meaningfulness, and Sound Quality across various models.
LM settings Adherence Score
Models SLM (or LM) Output Sequence N(↑) V( ↓) F( ↓) B( ↓) I( ↓)
Ground-Truth - - 4.48 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Resynthesized - - 4.48 0.12 0.20 0.12 0.10
Cascaded GPT-4o Text dialogue 4.58 0.40 0.18 1.73 0.91
Cascaded Llama3-70B Text dialogue 4.09 0.71 0.47 1.18 0.68
dGSLM DLM 2-channel units - 0.90 0.64 3.25 2.62
BeDLM Llama3.2-1B Alternating units 1.23 1.44 1.09 2.22 1.21
BeDLM (w/o pretrain) Llama3.2-1B Streamlined units 2.80 0.26 0.10 0.87 0.64
BeDLM (ours) Llama3.2-1B Streamlined units 3.11 0.25 0.15 0.87 0.58
Table 4: Comparison of adherence score across various models. Narrative adherence scores (N) ranging from 1-5,
as rated by GPT-4o. Behavioral adherence scores are provided for various conversational behaviors: verbosity (V),
filler word usage (F), backchannel usage (B), and interruption usage (I).
for the pre-training, we fine-tune the pre-trained
Llama3.2-1B model over 15k iterations, utilizing
4 A40 GPUs. Training was performed with a to-
tal batch size of 32× 2048 (65.5k tokens) and a
learning rate of 5× 10−5.
In the spoken dialogue generation training stage,
we use audio files from the behavior-SD dataset.
Each two-channel audio is converted into stream-
lined units by incorporating control tokens based
on backchannels, overlaps, and gaps. These stream-
lined units are paired with the corresponding narra-
tive and behavior conditions to build a supervised
fine-tuning dataset. In our experiments, we trained
the model on 94K dialogues (1.87K hours) using
8 A40 GPUs with a total batch size of 32× 4096
(130K tokens). Training spanned 18k iterations
with a learning rate of 5× 10−5.
6.2 Baselines
To evaluate BeDLM’s ability to adhere to behavior
conditions and generate natural spoken dialogues,
we compared it against several baseline models.
GT and Resynthesized audios. We randomly
select 500 narrative and behavioral instances from
the Behavior-SD test set, using their correspond-
ing audio as the ground truth. Additionally, we
resynthesize audio using HuBERT units derived
from these ground-truth audios as a baseline for
comparison.
dGSLM. We train dGSLM (Nguyen et al., 2023)
on the Behavior-SD dataset. As dGSLM is an un-
conditional model for generating spoken dialogues,
we add each speaker’s behavior condition tokens
at the start of the speech units to guide generation.
However, narrative conditions are not included in
dGSLM’s inputs.
Cascaded LLM + TTS. We implement a base-
line using Llama3-70B (Dubey et al., 2024) and
GPT-4o (2024-08-06) to generate text dialogues
based on narrative and behavior conditions, which
are then converted to speech using CosyV oice-
SFT (Du et al., 2024). Cascaded models often
struggle to produce parsable text for spoken dia-
logue generation, complicating direct comparisons
with BeDLM. To ensure fairness, we exclude condi-
tions that cascaded models could not handle across
all baselines and proposed models, focusing only
9580
===== PAGE 8/20 =====
on conditions where all models could generate vi-
able outputs. This approach ensures a balanced and
fair comparison. The text generation prompt for
cascaded models is detailed in Appendix D.
7 Results
7.1 Human Opinion Scores
For each spoken dialogue, three human evaluators
assess the following aspects: dialogue naturalness,
meaningfulness, and sound quality. Each sample is
rated on a 5-point Likert scale, ranging from 1 to
5. Detailed instructions provided to the evaluators
can be found in Appendix E.
Table 3 shows human evaluation scores, with
BeDLM using streamlined units and pre-training
achieving the best results, closely matching ground
truth in naturalness and meaningfulness. Its sound
quality is comparable to that of HuBERT and HiFi-
GAN resynthesis. Cascaded models perform well
in naturalness and sound quality but struggle with
speaker confusion and misplaced backchannels,
lowering meaningfulness. dGSLM consistently
scores the lowest. BeDLM variants without pre-
training or using alternating units show weaker
performance, highlighting the importance of pre-
training for natural, meaningful dialogue genera-
tion.
7.2 Adherence Scores
To evaluate the model’s adherence to narrative
conditions, we use GPT-4o to score the align-
ment between the provided narrative and Whis-
perX (Bain et al., 2023) transcriptions on a 5-point
scale (1=Bad, 5=Excellent), based on 100 samples.
The evaluation prompts are shown in Figure 13.
For behavioral adherence, we measure key fea-
tures (verbosity, filler words, backchannels, inter-
ruptions) for model-generated and ground-truth
dialogues across 500 samples. We calculate the
Wasserstein distance between the distributions of
each behavior level and average the normalized
distances to arrive at the final adherence score.
Table 4 compares the dialogue generation mod-
els based on narrative and behavioral alignment.
Our model, BeDLM, excels in behavioral coher-
ence, outperforming cascaded models and dGSLM
in managing verbosity, backchannels, and interrup-
tions. Although BeDLM’s narrative adherence (N)
score is lower than cascaded models using larger
LLMs like GPT-4o and Llama3-70B, it maintains
a smoother conversational flow. BeDLM without
pre-training shows lower narrative adherence but
similar behavioral alignment, while the alternat-
ing unit variant underperforms, highlighting the
importance of streamlined units and pre-training.
7.3 Speaker Consistency.
To evaluate the effectiveness of our speaker con-
ditioning method in maintaining speaker identity
throughout a dialogue, we conducted experiments
on 1,000 sampled utterances using randomly se-
lected prompt speech. Table 5 presents the mean co-
sine similarity computed using the WavLM-Base+
model (Chen et al., 2021). The cosine similarity
between (s0, si) reflects the consistency of the
speaker’s identity across the dialogue, while the
cosine similarity between (si−1,si) indicates the
smoothness of transitions between consecutive ut-
terances. Including the first utterance s0 as prompt
speech is essential for both speaker consistency
and smooth transitions, whereas incorporating the
current speaker’s previous utterance,si−1 does not
have a significant impact. However, relying solely
on the initial prompt s0 can lead to perceptible
discontinuities, often due to breathing sounds or
moments of silence. To address this, our proposed
method, which concatenates the initial and previous
utterances (s0,s i−1), yields the best performance in
maintaining speaker consistency and smooth tran-
sition throughout the dialogue.
Cosine Similarity (↑)
TTS Prompt (s0, si) ( si−1, si)
- 0.680 ± 0.09 0.687 ± 0.10
si−1 0.779 ± 0.15 0.850 ± 0.12
s0 0.889 ± 0.09 0.867 ± 0.10
s0, si−1 0.885 ± 0.09 0.872 ± 0.10
Table 5: Cosine similarity for different prompts
7.4 Qualitative results
Figure 5 shows two example waveforms from full-
duplex dialogues generated by our BeDLM. Both
follow the same narrative but differ in behavior con-
ditions. In panel (a), the first speaker avoids using
backchannels, whereas in panel (b), backchannels
occur frequently. This clear contrast in waveforms
demonstrates our model’s ability to capture vary-
ing backchannel conditions in conversation. Fur-
thermore, our model effectively reflects the second
speaker’s behavior conditions, such as interruptions
and verbosity.
9581
===== PAGE 9/20 =====
Narrative: Keilyn was critical of the holes he found in Danna's
research. He felt that Danna had not been thorough in his work
and that it reflected poorly on Keilyn.
(a) Keilyn - V(0) F(1) B(0) I(0) ,  Danna - V(1) F(0) B(0) I(2)
(b) Keilyn - V(0) F(1) B(2) I(0) ,  Danna - V(1) F(0) B(0) I(2)
backchannel
Interruption
Interruption Interruption
Figure 5: Waveforms of spoken dialogues generated
by BeDLM with the same narrative but different be-
havior conditions. (a) shows no backchannels, while
(b) includes frequent backchannels, reflecting the condi-
tioned behaviors in each case.
8 Conclusion
We present a scalable framework for generating
spoken dialogues with a diverse combination of
conversational behaviors using LLMs and TTS
models. Our contribution includes the Behavior-
SD dataset, comprising over 100K spoken dia-
logues with behavior annotations, and the BeDLM,
generating spoken dialogues that outperform base-
line models in naturalness, diversity, and behavioral
coherence. Future work could explore expanding
multi-speaker dialogues, improving behavior con-
trol granularity, and integrating sophisticated real-
time interaction capabilities to enhance practical
applications in various spoken dialogue systems.
9 Limitations and Potential Risks
Limitation. One limitation of our system is the
occasional mispronunciation, limited control over
complex emotions, and limited non-lexical vocal-
izations other than laughter. To assess the pronunci-
ation accuracy of Behavior-SD, we measure word
error rates using the automatic speech recognition
model, as detailed in Appendix B.3. Additionally,
while the scale of our model and dataset are smaller
than LLMs, they still effectively capture the seman-
tics for generating coherent dialogues. However,
this may impact the depth of nuance.
Potential Risks. The dataset is synthesized us-
ing LLMs and TTS models, which are known to
inherit biases from their training data. As a result,
Behavior-SD may not fully capture the nuances
of diverse cultural, social, or linguistic variations
in the real world, potentially leading to biased or
unnatural dialogues. To address this issue, we de-
signed our dataset generation process to incorpo-
rate diverse narratives from knowledge graphs and
various conversational styles, ensuring broad rep-
resentation. Additionally, we applied a Max-Min
sampling algorithm to select a diverse and inclu-
sive range of voices, as detailed in Appendix B.1.
However, we acknowledge that real-world conver-
sational complexity is vast, and continuous efforts
are required to improve inclusivity and fairness.
Furthermore, while BeDLM generates human-
like speech, it raises ethical concerns, particularly
regarding deepfake audio, misinformation, and
voice impersonation. To address this, we empha-
size that our work is intended for research purposes
and support the development of watermarking or
detection mechanisms to safeguard against misuse
in deceptive applications.
Acknowledgements
We want to thank the reviewers for their valuable
feedback. This work was supported by the Insti-
tute of Information & Communications Technol-
ogy Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded
by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. RS-2022-
II220156, Fundamental research on continual meta-
learning for quality enhancement of casual videos
and their 3D metaverse transformation), the IITP
grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No.
RS-2019-II191082, SW StarLab), the SNU-Global
Excellence Research Center establishment project,
the IITP (Institute of Information & Communica-
tions Technology Planning & Evaluation)-ITRC
(Information Technology Research Center) grant
funded by the Korea government (Ministry of Sci-
ence and ICT) (IITP-2025-RS-2024-00437633),
and the Basic Science Research Program through
the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF)
funded by the Ministry of Education (RS-2023-
00274280).
References
Yelaman Abdullin, Diego Molla-Aliod, Bahadorreza
Ofoghi, John Yearwood, and Qingyang Li. 2023.
Synthetic dialogue dataset generation using llm
9582
===== PAGE 10/20 =====
agents. In The 2023 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, page 181.
Max Bain, Jaesung Huh, Tengda Han, and Andrew Zis-
serman. 2023. Whisperx: Time-accurate speech tran-
scription of long-form audio. INTERSPEECH 2023.
Janet B Bavelas, Linda Coates, and Trudy Johnson.
2000. Listeners as co-narrators. Journal of personal-
ity and social psychology.
Elisabetta Bevacqua, Etienne de Sevin, Sylwia Julia
Hyniewska, and Catherine Pelachaud. 2012. A lis-
tener model: introducing personality traits. Journal
on Multimodal User Interfaces, page 12.
Peter Blomsma, Julija Vaitonyté, Gabriel Skantze, and
Marc Swerts. 2024. Backchannel behavior is idiosyn-
cratic. Language and Cognition.
Sanyuan Chen, Chengyi Wang, Zhengyang Chen,
Yu Wu, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Jinyu Li, Naoyuki
Kanda, Takuya Yoshioka, Xiong Xiao, Jian Wu,
Long Zhou, Shuo Ren, Yanmin Qian, Yao Qian, Jian
Wu, Michael Zeng, and Furu Wei. 2021. Wavlm:
Large-scale self-supervised pre-training for full stack
speech processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.13900.
Yunfei Chu, Jin Xu, Xiaohuan Zhou, Qian Yang, Shil-
iang Zhang, Zhijie Yan, Chang Zhou, and Jingren
Zhou. 2023. Qwen-audio: Advancing universal
audio understanding via unified large-scale audio-
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07919.
Christopher Cieri, David Miller, and Kevin Walker.
2004. The fisher corpus: A resource for the next
generations of speech-to-text. In LREC.
Etienne De Sevin, Sylwia Julia Hyniewska, and Cather-
ine Pelachaud. 2010. Influence of personality traits
on backchannel selection. In Intelligent Virtual
Agents: 10th International Conference, IVA 2010,
Philadelphia, PA, USA, September 20-22, 2010. Pro-
ceedings 10, pages 187–193. Springer.
Zhihao Du, Qian Chen, Shiliang Zhang, Kai Hu, Heng
Lu, Yexin Yang, Hangrui Hu, Siqi Zheng, Yue
Gu, Ziyang Ma, et al. 2024. Cosyvoice: A scal-
able multilingual zero-shot text-to-speech synthesizer
based on supervised semantic tokens. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.05407.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey,
Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman,
Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela
Fan, et al. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.21783.
Qingkai Fang, Shoutao Guo, Yan Zhou, Zhengrui Ma,
Shaolei Zhang, and Yang Feng. 2024. Llama-omni:
Seamless speech interaction with large language mod-
els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.06666.
John J Godfrey, Edward C Holliman, and Jane Mc-
Daniel. 1992. Switchboard: Telephone speech cor-
pus for research and development. In Acoustics,
speech, and signal processing, ieee international con-
ference on.
Julia A. Goldberg. 1990. Interrupting the discourse on
interruptions: An analysis in terms of relationally
neutral, power- and rapport-oriented acts. Journal of
Pragmatics, 14(6):883–903.
Google. 2024. Notebook LM. https:
//blog.google/technology/ai/
notebooklm-audio-overviews/.
Zhifang Guo, Yichong Leng, Yihan Wu, Sheng Zhao,
and Xu Tan. 2023. Prompttts: Controllable text-to-
speech with text descriptions. In ICASSP, pages 1–5.
IEEE.
Michael Hassid, Tal Remez, Tu Anh Nguyen, Itai Gat,
Alexis Conneau, Felix Kreuk, Jade Copet, Alexan-
dre Defossez, Gabriel Synnaeve, Emmanuel Dupoux,
et al. 2024. Textually pretrained speech language
models. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 36.
Wei-Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai,
Kushal Lakhotia, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Abdel-
rahman Mohamed. 2021. Hubert: Self-supervised
speech representation learning by masked prediction
of hidden units. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio,
Speech, and Language Processing, 29:3451–3460.
Rongjie Huang, Mingze Li, Dongchao Yang, Jia-
tong Shi, Xuankai Chang, Zhenhui Ye, Yuning Wu,
Zhiqing Hong, Jiawei Huang, Jinglin Liu, et al. 2024.
Audiogpt: Understanding and generating speech, mu-
sic, sound, and talking head. In Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages
23802–23804.
Tatsuya Kawahara. 2019. Spoken dialogue system for
a human-like conversational robot erica. In 9th In-
ternational Workshop on Spoken Dialogue System
Technology.
Hyunwoo Kim, Jack Hessel, Liwei Jiang, Peter West,
Ximing Lu, Youngjae Yu, Pei Zhou, Ronan Le Bras,
Malihe Alikhani, Gunhee Kim, Maarten Sap, and
Yejin Choi. 2023. Soda: Million-scale dialogue dis-
tillation with social commonsense contextualization.
In EMNLP.
Jungil Kong, Jaehyeon Kim, and Jaekyoung Bae. 2020a.
Hifi-gan: Generative adversarial networks for effi-
cient and high fidelity speech synthesis. NeurIPS,
33:17022–17033.
Jungil Kong, Jaehyeon Kim, and Jaekyoung Bae.
2020b. Hifi-gan: High-fidelity generative adversar-
ial networks for text-to-speech synthesis. https://
github.com/jik876/hifi-gan. Accessed: 2025-
02-07.
Kushal Lakhotia, Eugene Kharitonov, Wei-Ning Hsu,
Yossi Adi, Adam Polyak, Benjamin Bolte, Tu-Anh
Nguyen, Jade Copet, Alexei Baevski, Abdelrahman
9583
===== PAGE 11/20 =====
Mohamed, et al. 2021. On generative spoken lan-
guage modeling from raw audio. In ACL, volume 9,
pages 1336–1354.
Keon Lee, Kyumin Park, and Daeyoung Kim. 2023.
Dailytalk: Spoken dialogue dataset for conversational
text-to-speech. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), pages 1–5. IEEE.
Yinghao Aaron Li, Xilin Jiang, Jordan Darefsky,
Ge Zhu, and Nima Mesgarani. 2024. Styletalker:
Finetuning audio language model and style-based
text-to-speech model for fast spoken dialogue gener-
ation. In First Conference on Language Modeling.
Guan-Ting Lin, Cheng-Han Chiang, and Hung-yi Lee.
2024. Advancing large language models to capture
varied speaking styles and respond properly in spoken
conversations. In ACL.
Ziyang Ma, Yakun Song, Chenpeng Du, Jian Cong,
Zhuo Chen, Yuping Wang, Yuxuan Wang, and Xie
Chen. 2024. Language model can listen while speak-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.02622.
Meta. 2024. Llama 3.2. https://www.llama.
com/docs/model-cards-and-prompt-formats/
llama3_2/.
Kentaro Mitsui, Yukiya Hono, and Kei Sawada. 2023.
Towards human-like spoken dialogue generation be-
tween ai agents from written dialogue. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.01088.
Tu Anh Nguyen, Eugene Kharitonov, Jade Copet, Yossi
Adi, Wei-Ning Hsu, Ali Elkahky, Paden Tomasello,
Robin Algayres, Benoit Sagot, Abdelrahman Mo-
hamed, et al. 2023. Generative spoken dialogue lan-
guage modeling. In ACL.
OpenAI. 2024. GPT-4o V oice Mode.https://openai.
com/index/hello-gpt-4o/.
Mohamed Osman. 2022. Emo-tts:parallel transformer-
based text-to-speech model with emotional aware-
ness. In 2022 5th International Conference on Com-
puting and Informatics (ICCI), pages 169–174.
Soujanya Poria, Devamanyu Hazarika, Navonil Ma-
jumder, Gautam Naik, Erik Cambria, and Rada Mi-
halcea. 2019. MELD: A multimodal multi-party
dataset for emotion recognition in conversations. In
ACL, pages 527–536, Florence, Italy.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brock-
man, Christine Mcleavey, and Ilya Sutskever. 2023.
Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak su-
pervision. In Proceedings of the 40th International
Conference on Machine Learning , volume 202 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages
28492–28518. PMLR.
Andrew Reece, Gus Cooney, Peter Bull, Christine
Chung, Bryn Dawson, Casey Fitzpatrick, Tamara
Glazer, Dean Knox, Alex Liebscher, and Sebastian
Marin. 2023. The candor corpus: Insights from a
large multimodal dataset of naturalistic conversation.
Science Advances.
Shuzheng Si, Wentao Ma, Haoyu Gao, Yuchuan Wu,
Ting-En Lin, Yinpei Dai, Hangyu Li, Rui Yan, Fei
Huang, and Yongbin Li. 2023. Spokenwoz: A large-
scale speech-text benchmark for spoken task-oriented
dialogue agents. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 36, pages 39088–39118.
Curran Associates, Inc.
Apoorv Vyas, Bowen Shi, Matthew Le, Andros Tjandra,
Yi-Chiao Wu, Baishan Guo, Jiemin Zhang, Xinyue
Zhang, Robert Adkins, William Ngan, et al. 2023.
Audiobox: Unified audio generation with natural
language prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.15821.
Peng Wang, Songshuo Lu, Yaohua Tang, Sijie Yan,
Yuanjun Xiong, and Wei Xia. 2024. A full-duplex
speech dialogue scheme based on large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.19487.
Kenta Yamamoto, Koji Inoue, Shizuka Nakamura, Kat-
suya Takanashi, and Tatsuya Kawahara. 2018. Dia-
logue behavior control model for expressing a char-
acter of humanoid robots. In 2018 Asia-Pacific Sig-
nal and Information Processing Association Annual
Summit and Conference (APSIPA ASC), pages 1732–
1737.
Dong Zhang, Shimin Li, Xin Zhang, Jun Zhan,
Pengyu Wang, Yaqian Zhou, and Xipeng Qiu. 2023.
Speechgpt: Empowering large language models with
intrinsic cross-modal conversational abilities. In
Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: EMNLP 2023, pages 15757–15773.
Xinrong Zhang, Yingfa Chen, Shengding Hu, Xu Han,
Zihang Xu, Yuanwei Xu, Weilin Zhao, Maosong Sun,
and Zhiyuan Liu. 2024. Beyond the turn-based game:
Enabling real-time conversations with duplex models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15718.
9584
===== PAGE 12/20 =====
A Rich Text Dialogue Generation Pipeline
In this section, we offer further details outlined
in Section 3.1 on generating rich text dialogues,
including the prompts used for generation and the
filtering processes involved.
A.1 Prompts for Rich Text Dialogue
Generation
Dialogue generation. We use Figure 8 as the
prompt for GPT-4o. At this stage, speaker names
and narratives sampled from SODA are incorpo-
rated. From here, the process varies depending
on the behavioral traits assigned to each speaker.
Specifically, if both speakers are conditioned not to
interrupt, we manually exclude any constraints re-
lated to interruption from the prompt. Additionally,
each speaker’s behavior is mapped to text based on
its level, as shown in Table 6, and incorporated into
the prompt. The dialogue generated by GPT-4o
based on this prompt is then parsed and proceeds
to the next stage.
Backchannel insertion. As described in sec-
tion 3.1, to insert backchannels, we first identify
backchannel opportunity points (BOPs). To do this,
we use the prompt in Figure 9 with GPT-4o-mini
to find the natural pause points within each utter-
ance. Then, based on the backchannel insertion
level, we subsample the BOPs by selecting either
0–30% (Level 1) or 30–60% (Level 2) of the total.
To facilitate this, we insert placeholders such
as "speaker1 (backchannel): [MASK1]" or
"speaker2 (backchannel): [MASK2]" at the
subsampled BOPs to guide the LLM in generating
contextually appropriate backchannels at the speci-
fied positions. After adding masked utterances for
each BOP into the original dialogue, we use the
prompt from Figure 10 for GPT-4o.
Speech style captioning. To achieve more nat-
ural and emotionally rich speech synthesis, it is
crucial to capture the speech style. Since elements
like pitch, speed, and emotion can vary even within
a single utterance, we do not obtain the speech style
description at the utterance level. Instead, we uti-
lize NLTK’s sentence tokenizer1 to obtain speaking
styles on a sentence-wise basis. For this, we use the
prompt in Figure 11 to caption the pitch, speaking
style, and emotion for each sentence.
1https://www.nltk.org/api/nltk.tokenize.html#
nltk.tokenize.sent_tokenize
A.2 Interruption Scenario Banks
To ensure that the LLM covers diverse interrup-
tion scenarios and that Behavior-SD is behaviorally
rich, we provide examples of interruption scenarios
in the prompt during dialogue generation. Specif-
ically, we randomly select 1-3 samples from an
interruption scenario bank. The scenario bank is
composed of examples from seven categories of
interruption (Goldberg, 1990): disagreement, floor
taking, topic change, tangentialization, agreement,
assistance, and clarification. Figure 14 shows inter-
ruption scenarios examples.
B TTS Pipeline
This section expands on the conversion of rich text
dialogues into spoken dialogues in Section 3.2. We
present methodologies for enhancing speaker con-
sistency, improving the pronunciation of vocaliza-
tion backchannels, and evaluating the pronuncia-
tion accuracy of synthesized speech.
B.1 Speaker Bank
When a speaking style is provided as an instruction,
TTS models generate random voices corresponding
to different speakers. However, this method does
not ensure consistent speaker identity throughout a
dialogue. To address this limitation, we propose se-
lecting the prompt speech for the TTS model from
a pre-sampled "speaker bank" to ensure speaker
consistency across multiple utterances. For each
synthesized utterance, our method ensures that sub-
sequent utterances are generated using the same
speaker’s voice.
To ensure a diverse and representative selection
of speaker embedding, we applied a Max-Min sam-
pling algorithm, which maximizes the minimum
pairwise distance between embeddings to enhance
speaker distinction. We applied a Max-Min sam-
pling algorithm on a speaker bank of 30k samples
to ensure diversity in speaker selection, ultimately
choosing 26 male and 26 female speakers for the
final set.
B.2 Enhancing Vocalization Backchannels
through Voice Cloning
To mitigate issues related to suboptimal pronuncia-
tion of vocalization backchannels, such as "hmm"
and "mhm," in the CosyV oice TTS system, we
utilized ElevenLabs’ voice cloning 2 and text-to-
2https://elevenlabs.io/voice-cloning
9585
===== PAGE 13/20 =====
Behavior type Level Text
0 {speaker} speak very briefly, sharing only essential content without any extra details
Verbosity 1 {speaker} speak at a moderate length, providing a balanced amount of content—enough
to convey your point clearly but without overexplaining
2 {speaker} speak in detail, often providing lengthy explanations or descriptions whenever
possible
0 {speaker} never use filler words
Filler words 1 {speaker} moderately use filler words
2 {speaker} frequently use filler words
0 {speaker} never interrupt
Interruptions 1 {speaker} moderately interrupt
2 {speaker} frequently interrupt
Table 6: Mapping of speaker behaviors to text based on levels.
A
B
(b) Streamlined units
(c) Alternating units (chunk = 4)
(a) 2-channel units
A B A B A B
(d) Stereo audio
Figure 6: Examples of spoken dialogue representations: (a) two-channel units, (b) streamlined units, and (c)
alternating units with a chunk size of 4. (d) These representations can be easily converted to stereo audio using a
vocoder.
speech3 technologies. V oice cloning was applied
to the 52 speakers in our dataset, and the backchan-
nels were ranked by frequency. We selected the
100 most common backchannels for synthesis, with
each one synthesized up to 100 times. These syn-
thesized backchannels were then integrated into the
dialogue synthesis process to enhance the natural-
ness of the system’s output.
B.3 Word Error Rate Analysis of TTS Output
We evaluate the pronunciation accuracy of
Behavior-SD using Whisper-Large V3 (Radford
et al., 2023) for automatic speech recognition
(ASR). Specifically, we compute the word error
rate (WER) by comparing the ASR-transcribed
text with the ground-truth reference. On the test
split of Behavior-SD, the model achieves a WER
of 3.55%, whereas the original text-to-speech sys-
tem, CosyV oice (Du et al., 2024), attained a lower
3https://elevenlabs.io/text-to-speech
WER of 2.89% on the LibriSpeech test split. The
relatively higher WER of Behavior-SD can be pri-
marily attributed to distributional differences in the
text, including the insertion of filler words and the
misrecognition of proper names by the ASR model.
These results indicate that the synthesized speech
maintains high pronunciation accuracy, with er-
rors largely stemming from conversational artifacts
and occasional TTS mispronunciations. Further
improvements in the pronunciation accuracy of
Behavior-SD could be achieved by adopting a TTS
model with better pronunciation accuracy in place
of CosyV oice.
C BeDLM Details
C.1 Streamlined Spoken Dialogue
Representations
Figure 6 presents various representations of full-
duplex spoken dialogues. Our streamlined units
effectively capture diverse aspects of full-duplex
9586
===== PAGE 14/20 =====
interactions, including turn-taking, overlapping
speech, gaps, and backchannels.
C.2 Inference
During the inference stage of BeDLM, we utilize
the same prompt detailed in Figure 7. We then
autoregressively generate the next streamlined unit,
using a temperature of 0.8, top-k sampling withk
set to 60, and top-p sampling withp set to 0.8.
C.3 HuBERT
Due to computational constraints, we train only
the k-means clustering component of HuBERT
while adopting the dense model parameters from
TWIST (Hassid et al., 2024). This process en-
hances HuBERT’s ability to encode speaker at-
tributes in the Behavior-SD corpus, particularly
in capturing laughter. To achieve robust clustering,
the k-means model is trained for 25,600 iterations.
C.4 HuBERT2Mel
HuBERT2Mel converts HuBERT token sequences,
in combination with a speaker identity embedding,
into mel spectrograms that correspond to the target
speaker’s voice. These spectrograms are then used
to fine-tune HiFi-GAN, improving both the qual-
ity of waveform generation and training efficiency
compared to unit-based HiFi-GAN approaches.
The model predicts mel spectrograms derived
from 22,050 Hz speech, utilizing a hop size of 256,
a window size of 1024, and an FFT size of 1024,
with frequency limits of 0 Hz (fmin) and 8,000 Hz
(fmax). HuBERT2Mel processes token and speaker
embeddings through a combination of transformer
and convolutional layers incorporating gated linear
units (GLU). The model then applies upsampling to
align its output length with the mel spectrogram’s
temporal resolution. Finally, mel spectrogram pre-
dictions are generated via fully connected layers
with residual connections.
Training is conducted for 60,000 steps using
an L1 loss function, optimizing the model toward
ground-truth mel spectrograms.
C.5 HiFi-GAN
We fine-tune a pre-trained HiFi-GAN model (Kong
et al., 2020a) using pairs of original speech wave-
forms and their corresponding mel spectrograms,
which are generated by first converting the speech
into HuBERT tokens and then processing them
through HuBERT2Mel. For initialization, we adopt
the Universal-V1 checkpoints from the official im-
plementation (Kong et al., 2020b). Fine-tuning
is performed on a 1/100 subset of the Behavior-
SD training split for 100,000 steps, refining the
model to enhance the perceptual quality of BeDLM-
generated speech.
During inference, HiFi-GAN processes mel spec-
trograms generated by HuBERT2Mel and synthe-
sizes raw audio at a sampling rate of 22,050 Hz,
ensuring high-quality speech reconstruction.
D Cascaded Model Description
The text dialogue generation prompts used for the
cascaded models are illustrated in Figure 12.
E Human Evaluation Guidelines
The evaluators are instructed as follows:
• Dialogue Naturalness: Are backchannels
and laughter appropriately included to create
a human-like interaction? Is there a seamless
transition between the speaker and listener at
the right moments? Does the conversation
flow smoothly and not awkward?
• Meaningfulness: Does the dialogue have
meaningful content, and is it possible to un-
derstand what is being said?
• Sound Quality: Is the sound clear and easy
to hear, free from noise or other distractions?
These instructions are adapted from (Mitsui et al.,
2023).
9587
===== PAGE 15/20 =====
Variables
narrative, speaker1, speaker2, speaker1_behaviors, speaker2_behaviors, text_dialogue (or streamlined_units)
Prompts for LLM
Generate a dialogue between two speakers based on the given narrative. Follow the specific behaviors for each speaker.
Narrative:
- {narrative}
{speaker1} behaviors:
{speaker1_behaviors}
{speaker2} behaviors:
{speaker2_behaviors}
Ensure that the dialogue reflects both the narrative and the specified behaviors for each speaker
{% <|SOT|>{text_dialogue}<|EOS|> if pretraining phase else <|SOS|>{streamlined_units}<|EOS|> %}
Figure 7: A prompt designs narrative and conversational behaviors for conditional generation. During the pretraining
phase, the corresponding text dialogues are used as the target for the given condition.
Variables
speaker1, speaker2, narrative, speaker1_behaviors, speaker2_behaviors, interrupt_scenarios
Prompts for GPT-4o (2024-08-06)
# Instructions
Your task is to write a natural and conversational dialogue transcription between two persons.
Ensure that the generated dialogue should follow the constraints and output format outlined below.
# Constraints
- The conversation should be between two persons ({speaker1} and {speaker2}).
- The conversation should follow the narrative provided.
- The speakers use non-lexical vocalizations like [laughter], <laughter>yeah</laughter>.
- The conversation should not contain any non-verbal gestures, only verbal responses.
- The speakers should behave according to the behaviors described below.
- The conversation should include interruption scenarios (cut-off and take a turn).
- Interruption utterances are marked by appending "(interrupt)" after the speaker’s name, and the other speaker’s previous
cut-off utterance should be marked with [interrupted] to indicate where the interruption occurred.
- The conversation should include the below interruption scenarios:
{interrupt_scenarios}
- The conversation should contain 8-12 utterances.
# Narrative
{narrative}
# Speakers behaviors
{speaker1_behaviors}
{speaker2_behaviors}
# Output
The conversation should be in the following format:
<Format>
Here is a generated dialogue (N turns):
1) {speaker1}: utterance
2) {speaker2}: utterance
3) {speaker1}: utterance
...
N) {speaker2}: utterance
</Format>
Figure 8: A prompt for dialogue generation.
9588
===== PAGE 16/20 =====
Variables
utterance
Prompts for GPT-4o-mini (2024-07-18)
# Instructions
Your task is to reformat the given utterance according to the constraints below:
# Constraints
- Split the utterance into smaller parts at natural pause points, such as after commas, conjunctions, or at the end of phrases.
- Each smaller part becomes its own line.
# Example
## Original utterance
Jenifer: They do, which feels really rewarding. I’ve built up a good reputation because of my love and attention to
[interrupted]
## Reformatted Dialogue
Jenifer: They do,
Jenifer: which feels really rewarding.
Jenifer: I’ve built up a good reputation
Jenifer: because of my love and attention to [interrupted]
# Task
## Original utterance
{utterance}
Figure 9: A prompt for backchannel opportunity points detection.
9589
===== PAGE 17/20 =====
Variables
speaker1, speaker2, dialogue
Prompts for GPT-4o (2024-08-06)
# Instructions
Your task is to insert appropriate backchannels into the provided dialogue at the locations marked "{speaker1} (backchan-
nel): [MASK1]" or "{speaker2} (backchannel): [MASK2]".
- Only place backchannels in these marked locations.
- A backchannel is a vocalization or short word/phrase that shows the speaker is engaged and listening.
- Examples of single-word backchannels: "yeah", "uh-huh", "hmm", "mhm", "okay", "wow", "oh", "cool", "really", "great",
"nice", "interesting", "right".
- Examples of multi-word backchannels (no more than 3 words): "yeah, yeah", "okay, okay", "oh, really?", "that’s great".
- Examples of vocalization backchannels: "[laughter]", "<laughter>yeah</laughter>".
- If a backchannel is needed, replace [MASK1] or [MASK2] with an appropriate backchannel from the examples or a
similar expression.
- Ensure the number of inserted backchannels follows the specified constraints.
- The backchannels should be appropriate for the context and the speaker’s style.
# Example 1
## Given dialogue
A: I just found out that
A: there’s a new art exhibit downtown.
B (backchannel): [MASK2]
A: It’s all about abstract sculptures.
B (backchannel): [MASK2]
A: I think it might be really interesting to check out.
B: That sounds amazing. When are you planning to go?
## Response
A: I just found out that
A: there’s a new art exhibit downtown.
B (backchannel): Really?
A: It’s all about abstract sculptures.
B (backchannel): Oh, cool.
A: I think it might be really interesting to check out.
B: That sounds amazing. When are you planning to go?
# Example 2
## Given dialogue
A: I just found out that there’s a new art exhibit downtown. It’s all about abstract sculptures. I think it might be really
interesting to check out.
B: That sounds amazing.
A (backchannel): [MASK1]
B: When are you planning to go?
## Response
A: I just found out that there’s a new art exhibit downtown. It’s all about abstract sculptures. I think it might be really
interesting to check out.
B: That sounds amazing.
A (backchannel): Yeah!
B: When are you planning to go?
# Task
## Given dialogue
{dialogue}
Figure 10: A prompt for backchannel insertion.
9590
===== PAGE 18/20 =====
Variables
dialogue
Prompts for GPT-4o-mini (2024-07-18)
# Instructions
Your task is to generate captions for each utterance in the given dialogue.
Follow the format and use only the specified values for pitch, speed, and emotion.
# Constraints
- Pitch: low, normal, high
- Speed: slow, normal, fast
- Emotion: neutral, happy, sad, angry, fearful
# Output
- The captions are appended to the end of each utterance in the following format:
- (‘Pitch‘ pitch, ‘Speed‘ speed, ‘Emotion‘ emotion)
# Example
## Given dialogue:
Rylea: Hey, man, what’s going on?
Shavon (backchannel): Uh-huh.
Rylea: You seem really down.
Rylea: Is everything okay?
Shavon: Honestly, no... I’m just having a hard time right now.
## Response:
Rylea: Hey, man, what’s going on? (normal pitch, normal speed, neutral emotion)
Shavon (backchannel): Uh-huh. (normal pitch, fast speed, neutral emotion)
Rylea: You seem really down. (normal pitch, normal speed, sad emotion)
Rylea: Is everything okay? (normal pitch, normal speed, neutral emotion)
Shavon: Honestly, no... I’m just having a hard time right now. (normal pitch, normal speed, sad emotion)
# Task
## Given dialogue:
{dialogue}
Figure 11: A prompt for speech style captioning.
9591
===== PAGE 19/20 =====
Variables
speaker1, speaker2, narrative, speaker1_behaviors, speaker2_behaviors
Prompts for LLM
# Instructions
Your task is to write a natural and conversational dialogue transcription between two persons.
Ensure that the generated dialogue should follow the constraints and output format outlined below.
# Constraints
- The conversation should be between two persons ({speaker1} and {speaker2}).
- The conversation should follow the narrative provided.
- The conversation should not contain any non-verbal gestures, only verbal responses.
- The listener’s backchannel should be included within braces {{}} to indicate their position. For example:
- You know, {{Hmm?}} I always carry a book with me. {{Oh, really?}} There’s just something about having a story. . .
- The conversation should include interruption scenarios (cut-off and take a turn).
- Interruption utterances are marked by appending "(interrupt)" after the speaker’s name, and the other speaker’s previous
cut-off utterance should be marked with [interrupted] to indicate where the interruption occurred.
- The speakers should behave according to the behaviors described below.
- The conversation should contain 8-12 utterances.
# Narrative
{narrative}
# Speakers behaviors
{speaker1_behaviors}
{speaker2_behaviors}
# Output
The conversation should be in the following format:
<Format>
Here is a generated dialogue (N turns):
1) {speaker1}: [utterances] {{backchannels}} [utterances] {{backchannels}} ...
2) {speaker2}: [utterances] {{backchannels}} [utterances] {{backchannels}} ...
3) {speaker1}: [utterances] {{backchannels}} [utterances] {{backchannels}} ...
...
N) {speaker2} : utterance
</Format>
Figure 12: A prompt for cascaded model.
Variables
narrative, transcription
Prompts for GPT-4o (2024-08-06)
Evaluate the spoken dialogue between two speakers based on how well it aligns with the given narrative. The speaker
names might be slightly wrong due to transcription, so focus on the overall content. Use a scale of 1 to 5, where:
- 1 (Bad): The dialogue is entirely irrelevant to the narrative at any point.
- 2 (Poor): The dialogue is loosely related to the narrative in a few minor points.
- 3 (Fair): The dialogue is related to the narrative in some main points.
- 4 (Good): The dialogue follows the narrative in the main points but sometimes deviates from the focus.
- 5 (Excellent): The dialogue fully aligns with the narrative and does not deviate from it.
Narrative: {narrative}
Dialogue::
{transcription}
The response should be a only single digit from 1 to 5.
Figure 13: A prompt for GPT-4o to evaluate the narrative adherence score.
9592
===== PAGE 20/20 =====
Disagreement Tangentialization
When the listener interrupts to take the control of the interac-
tion, and disrupts the flow of dialogue, which can be seen as
a conflict.
The listener grabs the turn and sums up the information
received from the current speaker to prevent listening to
more unwanted information.
Speaker A: I think our team should focus on the marketing
campaign next month [interrupted]
Speaker A: The quarterly report indicates that we have a 15%
increase in sales, which is due to the new marketing strategy
we implemented. Additionally, we have [interrupted]
Speaker B (interrupt): No, that’s not the priority right now.
We need to fix our product issues first [interrupted]
Speaker B (interrupt) : So, sales are up 15% thanks to
marketing. Got it. What’s the next step?
Speaker A (interrupt): But if we don’t market, we won’t
have customers to use the product.
Speaker A: I was going to explain the other factors, but we
can move on.
Clarification Assistance
The listener expects the current speaker to clarify or explain
the information about which the listener is not clear.
The listener interrupts to provide the current speaker with a
word, a phrase, or an idea to help complete the utterance.
Speaker A: Our latest strategy involves leveraging social
media influencers to [interrupted]
Speaker A: We need to focus on the customer feedback to
improve our [interrupted]
Speaker B (interrupt) : So, sales are up 15% thanks to
marketing. Got it. What’s the next step?
Speaker B (interrupt): Products and services.
Speaker A: Yes, exactly. That will help us meet their expec-
tations better.
Speaker A: Yes, exactly. That will help us meet their expec-
tations better.
Floor Taking Topic Change
The listener grabs the floor and expands on the current
speaker’s topic.
The listener grabs the turn and changes the current topic of
conversation.
Speaker A: Our project timeline needs to be adjusted be-
cause [interrupted]
Speaker A: We need to discuss the budget allocation for the
upcoming quarter [interrupted]
Speaker B (interrupt): Absolutely, we need at least two
more weeks to ensure quality control and testing.
Speaker B (interrupt): Speaking of budgets, did you hear
about the new software upgrade we’re getting next month?
Speaker A: And we should also consider adding more team
members to speed up the process.
Speaker A: Oh, that sounds crucial. Let’s dive into the
details of the software upgrade then.
Agreement
The listener shows understanding or support to the speaker.
Speaker A: The new policy will help improve our workflow
efficiency [interrupted]
Speaker B (interrupt): Exactly, it will streamline our pro-
cesses significantly.
Speaker A: And reduce the time spent on manual tasks.
Figure 14: Samples from the interruption scenario bank.
9593